# GAPML: GESTALT analysis using penalized maximum likelihood
Associated paper: Feng, et al. (In press). "Estimation of cell lineage trees by maximum-likelihood phylogenetics". Annals of Applied Statistics.
Preprint available on [BioRxiv](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/595215v1).

# Installation
You will need to have PHYLIP mix installed so that you can call `mix` on the command line.
http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip/

We use `pip` to install things into a python virtual environment.
FIRST: if you want tree visualizations from ete3, you will need to do something special since we are using pip (rather than conda).
Install PyQt5 (`sudo apt-get` on linux, `brew install` on mac. For mac, see https://stackoverflow.com/questions/39821177/python-pyqt-on-macos-sierra).
Then run `pip install PyQt5` in your virtual environment.
AFTERWARDS: Install the libraries into your virtual environment through the `requirements.txt` file.

We use nestly + SCons to run simulations/analyses.
You should install scons outside the virtual environment, for a python 2.\* or a 3.5+ environment.
Then activate the virtual environment and then run `scons ___`.

You need to create a file `constant_paths.py` in the `gestalt` folder that provides the paths to the different executables. (mix and bhv distance calculators)

# GESTALT pipeline

`generate_data.py`: make data

`restrict_observed_barcodes.py`: restrict to observing the first K alleles

`get_parsimony_topologies.py` or `get_collapsed_oracle.py`: create tree topologies to fit to

`tune_topology.py`: to select the best topology given a set of possible topologies
* `--obs-file`: Pickle file with observations generated by `read_gestalt_data.py` or `generate_data.py`
* `--topology-file`: Pickle file with candidate topologies from `get_parsimony_topologies.py`
* `--out-model-file`: Name of output file.
* `--log-file`: Name of log file
* `--branch-pen-params`: Candidate penalty parameters for penalizing differences between branch lengths. We will tune over these using a variant of cross-validation.
* `--target-lam-pen-params`: Candidate penalty parameters for penalizing differences between target cut rates. We will tune over these using a variant of cross-validation.
* `--num-penalty-tune-iters`: Number of iterations we should spend on tuning the penalty parameters.
* `--num-penalty-tune-splits`: Number of data splits to create (typically 3 - 5)
* `--max-fit-splits`: Maximum number of data splits to use for fitting and tuning the penalty parameters (typically same value as `--num-penalty-tune-splits`, but you can use a smaller number to speed up the computation)
* `--num-chad-tune-iters`: Number of iterations to spend on tuning the tree topology with subtree prune and regraft (SPR) moves.
* `--num-chad-stop`: If we don't change the tree topology for this many steps, then stop tuning the topology.
* `--max-chad-tune-search`: Maximum number of SPR moves to consider at each iteration
* `--max-extra-steps`: Maximum number of hidden cuts we should consider when approximating the likelihood. (A large number means more computation time.)
* `--max-sum-states`: Maximum number of ancestral states to sum over when computing the likelihood. (A large number means more computation time.)
* `--max-iters`: Maximum number of iterations for tuning branch lengths and mutation parameters.
* `--num-inits`: Number of initializations to try when minimizing penalized log likelihood with respect to the branch lengths and mutation parameters

`convert_to_newick.py`: output the fitted tree in newick format

# Fitting the trees via alternative methods
`fit_chronos.py`: uses Sanderson 2002, the `chronos` function in R package `ape`

# How to get things running quickly and how to run analyses in the paper
The full pipelines are specified in the sconscript files.
To run it, we use `scons`. For example: `scons simulation_topol_consist/`
The sconscript files provides the full pipeline for generating data and analyzing it (see `simulation_topol_consist/sconscript` as an example) as well as processing data from GESTALT and analyzing it (see `analyze_gestalt/sconscript` as an example).

# Running tests
To run all the tests:
```
python3 -m unittest
```
To run specific test module tests/test\_me.py:
```
python3 -m unittest tests.<test_me>
```

# Experimental results
The fitted trees for the two adult fish in the paper is available at `gestalt/analyze_gestalt/_output/ADR*_PMLE_tree.json`.
